TwistyCMS Copyright
===================

The copyright applies to all TwistyCMS files, except those where
something else is mentioned.

Copyright (C) 2009-2010 Antonis Christofides

Permission is granted to redistribute and/or modify TwistyCMS under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or, at your
option, any later version.

TwistyCMS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
without any warranty; without even the implied warranty of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. See The GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program. If not, see http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

As a special exception, permission is granted to the core Django
developers and to the core Python developers to include any portion of
TwistyCMS in Django and/or Python and distribute it under the same
terms as Django and/or Python itself, provided that these terms
qualify as free software according to the `Debian Free Software
Guidelines`_.  "Core Django developers" and "core Python developers"
in this context means any person who has the power to decide what code
can be included in Django and Python respectively; this, for example,
may include a person who has been granted write access to the Django
or Python repository.  Obviously, after TwistyCMS code is released as
part of Django or Python, the Django or Python license is also
irrevocably added as an option for that code, even if the code is
subsequently removed from Django/Python. The intent of this provision
is solely to enable the inclusion of TwistyCMS code in Django and
Python, and it is explicitly forbidden to make such inclusion with the
intent of circumventing the normal license (i.e. GPL 3) of TwistyCMS.
For example, a core Django developer may not upload TwistyCMS code to
the Django repository and then remove it, solely in order to
circumvent the restrictions in TwistyCMS's normal licensing; a core
Django/Python developer may include TwistyCMS code in Django/Python
for the sole purpose of improving Django/Python.

.. _Debian Free Software Guidelines: http://www.debian.org/social_contract
